README.md, before:

borders-map
========================

* [What is this?](#what-is-this)
* [Assumptions](#assumptions)
* [What's in here?](#whats-in-here)
* [Bootstrap the project](#bootstrap-the-project)
* [Hide project secrets](#hide-project-secrets)
* [Save media assets](#save-media-assets)
* [Add a page to the site](#add-a-page-to-the-site)
* [Run the project](#run-the-project)
* [COPY editing](#copy-editing)
* [Arbitrary Google Docs](#arbitrary-google-docs)
* [Run Python tests](#run-python-tests)
* [Run Javascript tests](#run-javascript-tests)
* [Compile static assets](#compile-static-assets)
* [Test the rendered app](#test-the-rendered-app)
* [Deploy to S3](#deploy-to-s3)
* [Google Analytics](#google-analytics)

What is this?
-------------

This code is open source under the MIT license. See LICENSE for complete details.

Assumptions
-----------

The following things are assumed to be true in this documentation.

* You are running OSX.
* You are using Python 2.7. (Probably the version that came OSX.)
* You have [virtualenv](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv) and [virtualenvwrapper](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenvwrapper) installed and working.
* You have NPR's AWS credentials stored as environment variables locally.

For more details on the technology stack used with the app-template, see our [development environment blog post](http://blog.apps.npr.org/2013/06/06/how-to-setup-a-developers-environment.html).

What's in here?
---------------

The project contains the following folders and important files:

* ``confs`` -- Server configuration files for nginx and uwsgi. Edit the templates then ``fab <ENV> render_confs``, don't edit anything in ``confs/rendered`` directly.
* ``data`` -- Data files, such as those used to generate HTML.
* ``fabfile`` -- [Fabric](http://docs.fabfile.org/en/latest/) commands for automating setup and deployment.
* ``etc`` -- Miscellaneous scripts and metadata for project bootstrapping.
* ``jst`` -- Javascript ([Underscore.js](http://documentcloud.github.com/underscore/#template)) templates.
* ``less`` -- [LESS](http://lesscss.org/) files, will be compiled to CSS and concatenated for deployment.
* ``templates`` -- HTML ([Jinja2](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/)) templates, to be compiled locally.
* ``tests`` -- Python unit tests.
* ``www`` -- Static and compiled assets to be deployed. (a.k.a. "the output")
* ``www/assets`` -- A symlink to an S3 bucket containing binary assets (images, audio).
* ``www/live-data`` -- "Live" data deployed to S3 via cron jobs or other mechanisms. (Not deployed with the rest of the project.)
* ``www/test`` -- Javascript tests and supporting files.
* ``app.py`` -- A [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/) app for rendering the project locally.
* ``app_config.py`` -- Global project configuration for scripts, deployment, etc.
* ``copytext.py`` -- Code supporting the [Editing workflow](#editing-workflow)
* ``crontab`` -- Cron jobs to be installed as part of the project.
* ``public_app.py`` -- A [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/) app for running server-side code.
* ``render_utils.py`` -- Code supporting template rendering.
* ``requirements.txt`` -- Python requirements.
* ``static.py`` -- Static Flask views used in both ``app.py`` and ``public_app.py``.

Bootstrap the project
---------------------

Node.js is required for the static asset pipeline. If you don't already have it, get it like this:

```
brew install node
curl https://npmjs.org/install.sh | sh
```

Then bootstrap the project:

```
cd borders-map
mkvirtualenv --no-site-packages borders-map
pip install -r requirements.txt
fab bootstrap
```

You may hit a `boto` error when running the above, since we're using an AWS S3 bucket with periods in its name. If so, try one of the solutions in [this thread](https://github.com/boto/boto/issues/2836); simplest may be creating a `~/.boto` file with contents:

```
[s3]
calling_format = boto.s3.connection.OrdinaryCallingFormat
```

Hide project secrets
--------------------

Project secrets should **never** be stored in ``app_config.py`` or anywhere else in the repository. They will be leaked to the client if you do. Instead, always store passwords, keys, etc. in environment variables and document that they are needed here in the README.

Save media assets
-----------------

Large media assets (images, videos, audio) are synced with an Amazon S3 bucket called ```assets.apps.npr.org``` in a folder with the name of the project. This allows everyone who works on the project to access these assets without storing them in the repo, giving us faster clone times and the ability to open source our work.

Syncing these assets requires running a couple different commands at the right times. When you create new assets or make changes to current assets that need to get uploaded to the server, run ```fab assets.sync```. This will do a few things:

* If there is an asset on S3 that does not exist on your local filesystem it will be downloaded.
* If there is an asset on that exists on your local filesystem but not on S3, you will be prompted to either upload (type "u") OR delete (type "d") your local copy.
* You can also upload all local files (type "la") or delete all local files (type "da"). Type "c" to cancel if you aren't sure what to do.
* If both you and the server have an asset and they are the same, it will be skipped.
* If both you and the server have an asset and they are different, you will be prompted to take either the remote version (type "r") or the local version (type "l").
* You can also take all remote versions (type "ra") or all local versions (type "la"). Type "c" to cancel if you aren't sure what to do.

Unfortunantely, there is no automatic way to know when a file has been intentionally deleted from the server or your local directory. When you want to simultaneously remove a file from the server and your local environment (i.e. it is not needed in the project any longer), run ```fab assets.rm:"www/assets/file_name_here.jpg"```

Adding a page to the site
-------------------------

A site can have any number of rendered pages, each with a corresponding template and view. To create a new one:

* Add a template to the ``templates`` directory. Ensure it extends ``_base.html``.
* Add a corresponding view function to ``app.py``. Decorate it with a route to the page name, i.e. ``@app.route('/filename.html')``
* By convention only views that end with ``.html`` and do not start with ``_``  will automatically be rendered when you call ``fab render``.

Run the project
---------------

A flask app is used to run the project locally. It will automatically recompile templates and assets on demand.

```
workon borders-map
python app.py
```

Visit [localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) in your browser.

COPY editing
------------

This app uses a Google Spreadsheet for a simple key/value store that provides an editing workflow.

View the [sample copy spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0AlXMOHKxzQVRdHZuX1UycXplRlBfLVB0UVNldHJYZmc#gid=0).

This document is specified in ``app_config`` with the variable ``COPY_GOOGLE_DOC_KEY``. To use your own spreadsheet, change this value to reflect your document's key (found in the Google Docs URL after ``&key=``).

A few things to note:

* If there is a column called ``key``, there is expected to be a column called ``value`` and rows will be accessed in templates as key/value pairs
* Rows may also be accessed in templates by row index using iterators (see below)
* You may have any number of worksheets
* This document must be "published to the web" using Google Docs' interface

The app template is outfitted with a few ``fab`` utility functions that make pulling changes and updating your local data easy.

To update the latest document, simply run:

```
fab update_copy
```

Note: ``update_copy`` runs automatically whenever ``fab render`` is called.

At the template level, Jinja maintains a ``COPY`` object that you can use to access your values in the templates. Using our example sheet, to use the ``byline`` key in ``templates/index.html``:

```
{{ COPY.attribution.byline }}
```

More generally, you can access anything defined in your Google Doc like so:

```
{{ COPY.sheet_name.key_name }}
```

You may also access rows using iterators. In this case, the column headers of the spreadsheet become keys and the row cells values. For example:

```
{% for row in COPY.sheet_name %}
{{ row.column_one_header }}
{{ row.column_two_header }}
{% endfor %}
```

Arbitrary Google Docs
----------------------
Sometimes, our projects need to read data from a Google Doc that's not involved with the COPY rig. In this case, we've got a class for you to download and parse an arbitrary Google Doc to a CSV.

This solution will download the uncached version of the document, unlike those methods which use the "publish to the Web" functionality baked into Google Docs. Published versions can take up to 15 minutes up update!

First, export a valid Google username (email address) and password to your environment.

```
export APPS_GOOGLE_EMAIL=foo@gmail.com
export APPS_GOOGLE_PASS=MyPaSsW0rd1!
```

Then, you can load up the `GoogleDoc` class in `etc/gdocs.py` to handle the task of authenticating and downloading your Google Doc.

Here's an example of what you might do:

```
import csv

from etc.gdoc import GoogleDoc

def read_my_google_doc():
    doc = {}
    doc['key'] = '0ArVJ2rZZnZpDdEFxUlY5eDBDN1NCSG55ZXNvTnlyWnc'
    doc['gid'] = '4'
    doc['file_format'] = 'csv'
    doc['file_name'] = 'gdoc_%s.%s' % (doc['key'], doc['file_format'])

    g = GoogleDoc(**doc)
    g.get_auth()
    g.get_document()

    with open('data/%s' % doc['file_name'], 'wb') as readfile:
        csv_file = list(csv.DictReader(readfile))

    for line_number, row in enumerate(csv_file):
        print line_number, row

read_my_google_doc()
```

Google documents will be downloaded to `data/gdoc.csv` by default.

You can pass the class many keyword arguments if you'd like; here's what you can change:
* gid AKA the sheet number
* key AKA the Google Docs document ID
* file_format (xls, csv, json)
* file_name (to download to)

See `etc/gdocs.py` for more documentation.

Run Javascript tests
--------------------

With the project running, visit [localhost:8000/test/SpecRunner.html](http://localhost:8000/test/SpecRunner.html).

Compile static assets
---------------------

Compile LESS to CSS, compile javascript templates to Javascript and minify all assets:

```
workon borders-map
fab render
```

(This is done automatically whenever you deploy to S3.)

Test the rendered app
---------------------

If you want to test the app once you've rendered it out, just use the Python webserver:

```
cd www
python -m SimpleHTTPServer
```

Deploy to S3
------------

```
fab staging master deploy
```

Google Analytics
----------------

The following events are tracked in Google Analytics:

|Category|Action|Label|Value|Custom 1|Custom 2|
|--------|------|-----|-----|--------|--------|
|Borderlands|Slideshow - Clicked Go|||||
|Borderlands|Slideshow - Reached Last Slide||||
|Borderlands|Video - Play||||
|Borderlands|Video - Ended||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Keyboard||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Slide Controls||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Section Nav||||
|Borderlands|Arrived via Deep Link|`hash`|||
|Borderlands|Time on Slide|`hash`|`timeOnSlide`||

**Notes**

* The *Navigation* events functions as booleans. They are only tracked once per session.
* The *Time on Slide* event fires on slide exit. Due to weirdness in jquery.fullpage this fires extra time if deep-linking into a slide. It will never fire for the last slide the user viewed. Times are tracked in *milliseconds*. (Because GA doesn't support fractional values.)

Commit message:

bump reqs, disconnect from gdocs, point to local xls file

README.md, after:

borders-map
========================

* [What is this?](#what-is-this)
* [Assumptions](#assumptions)
* [What's in here?](#whats-in-here)
* [Bootstrap the project](#bootstrap-the-project)
* [Hide project secrets](#hide-project-secrets)
* [Save media assets](#save-media-assets)
* [Add a page to the site](#add-a-page-to-the-site)
* [Run the project](#run-the-project)
* [COPY editing](#copy-editing)
* [Arbitrary Google Docs](#arbitrary-google-docs)
* [Run Python tests](#run-python-tests)
* [Run Javascript tests](#run-javascript-tests)
* [Compile static assets](#compile-static-assets)
* [Test the rendered app](#test-the-rendered-app)
* [Deploy to S3](#deploy-to-s3)
* [Google Analytics](#google-analytics)

What is this?
-------------

This code is open source under the MIT license. See LICENSE for complete details.

Assumptions
-----------

The following things are assumed to be true in this documentation.

* You are running OSX.
* You are using Python 2.7. (Probably the version that came OSX.)
* You have [virtualenv](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv) and [virtualenvwrapper](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenvwrapper) installed and working.
* You have NPR's AWS credentials stored as environment variables locally.

For more details on the technology stack used with the app-template, see our [development environment blog post](http://blog.apps.npr.org/2013/06/06/how-to-setup-a-developers-environment.html).

What's in here?
---------------

The project contains the following folders and important files:

* ``confs`` -- Server configuration files for nginx and uwsgi. Edit the templates then ``fab <ENV> render_confs``, don't edit anything in ``confs/rendered`` directly.
* ``data`` -- Data files, such as those used to generate HTML.
* ``fabfile`` -- [Fabric](http://docs.fabfile.org/en/latest/) commands for automating setup and deployment.
* ``etc`` -- Miscellaneous scripts and metadata for project bootstrapping.
* ``jst`` -- Javascript ([Underscore.js](http://documentcloud.github.com/underscore/#template)) templates.
* ``less`` -- [LESS](http://lesscss.org/) files, will be compiled to CSS and concatenated for deployment.
* ``templates`` -- HTML ([Jinja2](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/)) templates, to be compiled locally.
* ``tests`` -- Python unit tests.
* ``www`` -- Static and compiled assets to be deployed. (a.k.a. "the output")
* ``www/assets`` -- A symlink to an S3 bucket containing binary assets (images, audio).
* ``www/live-data`` -- "Live" data deployed to S3 via cron jobs or other mechanisms. (Not deployed with the rest of the project.)
* ``www/test`` -- Javascript tests and supporting files.
* ``app.py`` -- A [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/) app for rendering the project locally.
* ``app_config.py`` -- Global project configuration for scripts, deployment, etc.
* ``copytext.py`` -- Code supporting the [Editing workflow](#editing-workflow)
* ``crontab`` -- Cron jobs to be installed as part of the project.
* ``public_app.py`` -- A [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/) app for running server-side code.
* ``render_utils.py`` -- Code supporting template rendering.
* ``requirements.txt`` -- Python requirements.
* ``static.py`` -- Static Flask views used in both ``app.py`` and ``public_app.py``.

Bootstrap the project
---------------------

Node.js is required for the static asset pipeline. If you don't already have it, get it like this:

```
brew install node
curl https://npmjs.org/install.sh | sh
```

Then bootstrap the project:

```
cd borders-map
mkvirtualenv --no-site-packages borders-map
pip install -r requirements.txt
fab bootstrap
```

You may hit a `boto` error when running the above, since we're using an AWS S3 bucket with periods in its name. If so, try one of the solutions in [this thread](https://github.com/boto/boto/issues/2836); simplest may be creating a `~/.boto` file with contents:

```
[s3]
calling_format = boto.s3.connection.OrdinaryCallingFormat
```

Hide project secrets
--------------------

Project secrets should **never** be stored in ``app_config.py`` or anywhere else in the repository. They will be leaked to the client if you do. Instead, always store passwords, keys, etc. in environment variables and document that they are needed here in the README.

Save media assets
-----------------

Large media assets (images, videos, audio) are synced with an Amazon S3 bucket called ```assets.apps.npr.org``` in a folder with the name of the project. This allows everyone who works on the project to access these assets without storing them in the repo, giving us faster clone times and the ability to open source our work.

Syncing these assets requires running a couple different commands at the right times. When you create new assets or make changes to current assets that need to get uploaded to the server, run ```fab assets.sync```. This will do a few things:

* If there is an asset on S3 that does not exist on your local filesystem it will be downloaded.
* If there is an asset on that exists on your local filesystem but not on S3, you will be prompted to either upload (type "u") OR delete (type "d") your local copy.
* You can also upload all local files (type "la") or delete all local files (type "da"). Type "c" to cancel if you aren't sure what to do.
* If both you and the server have an asset and they are the same, it will be skipped.
* If both you and the server have an asset and they are different, you will be prompted to take either the remote version (type "r") or the local version (type "l").
* You can also take all remote versions (type "ra") or all local versions (type "la"). Type "c" to cancel if you aren't sure what to do.

Unfortunantely, there is no automatic way to know when a file has been intentionally deleted from the server or your local directory. When you want to simultaneously remove a file from the server and your local environment (i.e. it is not needed in the project any longer), run ```fab assets.rm:"www/assets/file_name_here.jpg"```

Adding a page to the site
-------------------------

A site can have any number of rendered pages, each with a corresponding template and view. To create a new one:

* Add a template to the ``templates`` directory. Ensure it extends ``_base.html``.
* Add a corresponding view function to ``app.py``. Decorate it with a route to the page name, i.e. ``@app.route('/filename.html')``
* By convention only views that end with ``.html`` and do not start with ``_``  will automatically be rendered when you call ``fab render``.

Run the project
---------------

A flask app is used to run the project locally. It will automatically recompile templates and assets on demand.

```
workon borders-map
python app.py
```

Visit [localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) in your browser.

COPY editing
------------

**IMPORTANT NOTE: This project relies on an outdated method to access content in Google Spreadsheets. For now, the connection has been disabled (see `update_copy()` in `fabfile/__init__.py`), and the project instead pulls from a spreadsheet stored in `data/copy.xls`.**

This app uses a Google Spreadsheet for a simple key/value store that provides an editing workflow.

View the [sample copy spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0AlXMOHKxzQVRdHZuX1UycXplRlBfLVB0UVNldHJYZmc#gid=0).

This document is specified in ``app_config`` with the variable ``COPY_GOOGLE_DOC_KEY``. To use your own spreadsheet, change this value to reflect your document's key (found in the Google Docs URL after ``&key=``).

A few things to note:

* If there is a column called ``key``, there is expected to be a column called ``value`` and rows will be accessed in templates as key/value pairs
* Rows may also be accessed in templates by row index using iterators (see below)
* You may have any number of worksheets
* This document must be "published to the web" using Google Docs' interface

The app template is outfitted with a few ``fab`` utility functions that make pulling changes and updating your local data easy.

To update the latest document, simply run:

```
fab update_copy
```

Note: ``update_copy`` runs automatically whenever ``fab render`` is called.

At the template level, Jinja maintains a ``COPY`` object that you can use to access your values in the templates. Using our example sheet, to use the ``byline`` key in ``templates/index.html``:

```
{{ COPY.attribution.byline }}
```

More generally, you can access anything defined in your Google Doc like so:

```
{{ COPY.sheet_name.key_name }}
```

You may also access rows using iterators. In this case, the column headers of the spreadsheet become keys and the row cells values. For example:

```
{% for row in COPY.sheet_name %}
{{ row.column_one_header }}
{{ row.column_two_header }}
{% endfor %}
```

Arbitrary Google Docs
----------------------
Sometimes, our projects need to read data from a Google Doc that's not involved with the COPY rig. In this case, we've got a class for you to download and parse an arbitrary Google Doc to a CSV.

This solution will download the uncached version of the document, unlike those methods which use the "publish to the Web" functionality baked into Google Docs. Published versions can take up to 15 minutes up update!

First, export a valid Google username (email address) and password to your environment.

```
export APPS_GOOGLE_EMAIL=foo@gmail.com
export APPS_GOOGLE_PASS=MyPaSsW0rd1!
```

Then, you can load up the `GoogleDoc` class in `etc/gdocs.py` to handle the task of authenticating and downloading your Google Doc.

Here's an example of what you might do:

```
import csv

from etc.gdoc import GoogleDoc

def read_my_google_doc():
    doc = {}
    doc['key'] = '0ArVJ2rZZnZpDdEFxUlY5eDBDN1NCSG55ZXNvTnlyWnc'
    doc['gid'] = '4'
    doc['file_format'] = 'csv'
    doc['file_name'] = 'gdoc_%s.%s' % (doc['key'], doc['file_format'])

    g = GoogleDoc(**doc)
    g.get_auth()
    g.get_document()

    with open('data/%s' % doc['file_name'], 'wb') as readfile:
        csv_file = list(csv.DictReader(readfile))

    for line_number, row in enumerate(csv_file):
        print line_number, row

read_my_google_doc()
```

Google documents will be downloaded to `data/gdoc.csv` by default.

You can pass the class many keyword arguments if you'd like; here's what you can change:
* gid AKA the sheet number
* key AKA the Google Docs document ID
* file_format (xls, csv, json)
* file_name (to download to)

See `etc/gdocs.py` for more documentation.

Run Javascript tests
--------------------

With the project running, visit [localhost:8000/test/SpecRunner.html](http://localhost:8000/test/SpecRunner.html).

Compile static assets
---------------------

Compile LESS to CSS, compile javascript templates to Javascript and minify all assets:

```
workon borders-map
fab render
```

(This is done automatically whenever you deploy to S3.)

Test the rendered app
---------------------

If you want to test the app once you've rendered it out, just use the Python webserver:

```
cd www
python -m SimpleHTTPServer
```

Deploy to S3
------------

```
fab staging master deploy
```

Google Analytics
----------------

The following events are tracked in Google Analytics:

|Category|Action|Label|Value|Custom 1|Custom 2|
|--------|------|-----|-----|--------|--------|
|Borderlands|Slideshow - Clicked Go|||||
|Borderlands|Slideshow - Reached Last Slide||||
|Borderlands|Video - Play||||
|Borderlands|Video - Ended||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Keyboard||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Slide Controls||||
|Borderlands|Navigation - Used Section Nav||||
|Borderlands|Arrived via Deep Link|`hash`|||
|Borderlands|Time on Slide|`hash`|`timeOnSlide`||

**Notes**

* The *Navigation* events functions as booleans. They are only tracked once per session.
* The *Time on Slide* event fires on slide exit. Due to weirdness in jquery.fullpage this fires extra time if deep-linking into a slide. It will never fire for the last slide the user viewed. Times are tracked in *milliseconds*. (Because GA doesn't support fractional values.)
